# FCAC Data Analysis


**Objective** – This analysis was done for Frederick County Animal Control (FCAC) in effort to identify important trends and to determine the factors that have the most impact on predicting an animal’s outcome (adoption/return to owner or euthanasia) at FCAC.  This was for a final capstone project for Loyola University Maryland Data Science Master's program.

**Approach** – The data used for the analysis covered October 2011 through September 2019 and included roughly 30,000 dogs and cats.  The first phase of the project involved conducting thorough exploratory data analysis to understand different patterns within the data.  The second phase of the project involved implementing different supervised machine learning algorithms to predict if a dog or cat would be adopted/returned to owner or euthanized.  Separate models were created for dogs and cats in order to compare the factors that had the most predictive power.

**Results** – The exploratory data analysis phase led to many important findings.  The 21702, 21701, and 21703 zip-codes were identified as top regions for abandoned animals.  Thurmont (21788) was also identified as a top region for stray and seized cats.  FCAC leadership can use this information to help promote spay/neutering programs in these areas or even work with veterinarians to lower costs in those areas.  Additionally, an analysis of adoption times showed that Wednesday evenings were the most popular day for adoptions, followed by Saturday afternoons.  FCAC staff can use this information to determine when to schedule the most convenient adoption times or even extend their hours.  While analyzing the length of time dogs and cats spend at the shelter, an important finding was that cats wait a much longer amount of time to get adopted than dogs.  Cats waited a median of 42 days, while dogs waited a median of 15 days.  In particular, juvenile dogs are the quickest to get adopted, and adult cats wait the longest to get adopted.  Dynamic visualizations showing additional plots and charts were compiled into an interactive dashboard via Tableau.      

The three different algorithms used for machine learning were random forest, XGBoost, and logistic regression with lasso regularization.  For both cats and dogs, the three algorithms performed nearly the same.  For cats, the accuracy, F1 score, and AUC were roughly 0.76, 0.74, and 0.82 respectively.  For dogs, the accuracy, F1 score, and AUC were roughly 0.83, 0.76, and 0.86.  These numbers are close to 1 (meaning a perfect model) but show that there is room for improvement.  Based on the random forest models, the top predictive features for cats were the age of the cat, the condition the cat is in, the intake type, and whether or not it was pre-altered.  For dogs, the top features were the intake type, the condition the dog is in, the age of the dog, and the gender of the dog.  It is evident that both the age and the condition of both dogs and cats are key factors when it comes to their outcome at FCAC.   

**Conclusions** – Overall, supervised machine learning techniques were able to predict an animal’s shelter outcome with some success.  The biggest challenge was due to a limited amount of data in both number of records and variables.  An increase in data (i.e. from other animal shelters) could provide more generalizable results and a model that can be used as a decision-making tool.  Although the models should never be used as a mechanism for deciding if an animal should be euthanized, it could be used as a tool to identify animals that have a higher chance of being euthanized.  If euthanasia is avoidable, these animals could potentially be promoted more often on social media and given extra attention (i.e. behavioral interventions).

**Tableau Dashboard:** https://public.tableau.com/profile/kaitlyn.longo#!/vizhome/FCACDataAnalysis/FinalDashboard
